_docs/local-postgresql.md, before:

- If you need to install PostgreSQL see the [installing PostgreSQL guides](https://github.com/CUNYTechPrep/guides#postgresql)

### Create a PostgreSQL user and database

The project-starter template expects the following for local development:

- PostgreSQL User/Role
  - name: `ctp_user`
  - password: `ctp_pass`
- PostgreSQL Database
  - name: `ctp_appdb_development`

#### For Windows/pgAdmin users

If you are on Windows and installed **pgAdmin** follow our [pgAdmin guide](https://github.com/CUNYTechPrep/guides/blob/master/pgAdmin-create-user-db.md) to create a user in PostgreSQL named `ctp_user` with the password `ctp_pass` and a database named `ctp_appdb_development`.

#### For Mac/Linux users

Create a user in PostgreSQL named `ctp_user` with the password `ctp_pass`:

> This only needs to be done one time on your machine
> You can create additional users if you want to.

```
createuser -P -s -e ctp_user
```

Create a separate db for this project:

```
createdb -h localhost -U ctp_user ctp_appdb_development
```

> You will create a DB for each project you start based on this repo. For other projects change `ctp_appdb_development` to the new apps database name.

Commit message:

Update the local postgresql setup docs

_docs/local-postgresql.md, after:

# Setting up PostgreSQL locally

The goals of this guide are to help you:

- Install PostgreSQL
- Create a ROLE/USER with a PASSWORD
- Create a DATABASE
- Get your database URL connection string

## Install PostgreSQL

Check if you already have PostgreSQL installed. You can try one of the following:

- run the command `which psql`
- check if it's listed in your computers Applications

If you need to install PostgreSQL see the [installing PostgreSQL guides](https://github.com/CUNYTechPrep/guides#postgresql)

## Create a PostgreSQL user and database

For this project-starter template you can use any values for the username, password, and database name. The rest of this guide will assume the following values were chosen:

- PostgreSQL User/Role
  - name: `ctp_user`
  - password: `ctp_pass`
- PostgreSQL Database
  - name: `ctp_appdb_development`

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Whatever values you choose, save them or you will lose access to your database data and will have to create a new one.

### For Windows/pgAdmin users

If you are on Windows or installed **pgAdmin** follow our [pgAdmin guide](https://github.com/CUNYTechPrep/guides/blob/master/pgAdmin-create-user-db.md) to create a user in PostgreSQL named `ctp_user` with the password `ctp_pass` and a database named `ctp_appdb_development`.

### For Mac/Linux users

Create a user in PostgreSQL named `ctp_user` with the password `ctp_pass`:

```
createuser -P -s -e ctp_user
```

Create a new db for this project:

```
createdb -h localhost -U ctp_user ctp_appdb_development
```

> You will create a DB for each project you start based on this repo. For other projects change `ctp_appdb_development` to the new apps database name.
